Algernon Moncrieff
Rev. Canon Chasuble, D.D
ACT II.  The Garden at the Manor House, Woolton
TIME: The PresentAlgernon Moncrieff: Mr. Allen AynesworthMerriman: Mr. Frank DyallLady Bracknell: Miss Rose LeclercqCecily Cardew: Miss Evelyn Millard



FIRST ACT


SCENE


Morning-room in Algernon's flat in Half-Moon Street.  The room is
luxuriously and artistically furnished.  The sound of a piano is heard in
the adjoining room
Algernon.  I'm sorry for that, for your sake.  I don't play
accurately--any one can play accurately--but I play with wonderful
expression.  As far as the piano is concerned, sentiment is my forte.  I
keep science for Life
Algernon.  And, speaking of the science of Life, have you got the
cucumber sandwiches cut for Lady Bracknell?

Lane.  Yes, sir.  [Hands them on a salver.]

Algernon.  [Inspects them, takes two, and sits down on the sofa.]  Oh! . . 
Lane.  Yes, sir; eight bottles and a pint
Lane.  I attribute it to the superior quality of the wine, sir.  I have
often observed that in married households the champagne is rarely of a
first-rate brand
Algernon.  [Languidly_._]  I don't know that I am much interested in your
family life, Lane
Algernon.  Very natural, I am sure.  That will do, Lane, thank you
[Enter Lane.]

Lane.  Mr. Ernest Worthing
Algernon.  What on earth do you do there?

Jack.  [Pulling off his gloves_._]  When one is in town one amuses
oneself.  When one is in the country one amuses other people.  It is
excessively boring
Algernon.  Got nice neighbours in your part of Shropshire?

Jack.  Perfectly horrid!  Never speak to one of them
Jack.  How perfectly delightful!

Algernon.  Yes, that is all very well; but I am afraid Aunt Augusta won't
quite approve of your being here
Jack.  I am in love with Gwendolen.  I have come up to town expressly to
propose to her
Jack.  How utterly unromantic you are!

Algernon.  I really don't see anything romantic in proposing.  It is very
romantic to be in love.  But there is nothing romantic about a definite
proposal.  Why, one may be accepted.  One usually is, I believe.  Then
the excitement is all over.  The very essence of romance is uncertainty
Jack.  I have no doubt about that, dear Algy.  The Divorce Court was
specially invented for people whose memories are so curiously
constituted
Algernon.  That is quite a different matter.  She is my aunt.  [Takes
plate from below.]  Have some bread and butter.  The bread and butter is
for Gwendolen.  Gwendolen is devoted to bread and butter
Algernon.  Well, my dear fellow, you need not eat as if you were going to
eat it all.  You behave as if you were married to her already.  You are
not married to her already, and I don't think you ever will be
Jack.  Oh, that is nonsense!

Algernon.  It isn't.  It is a great truth.  It accounts for the
extraordinary number of bachelors that one sees all over the place.  In
the second place, I don't give my consent
[Enter Lane.]

Algernon.  Bring me that cigarette case Mr. Worthing left in the smoking-
room the last time he dined here
Algernon.  Well, I wish you would offer one.  I happen to be more than
usually hard up
[Enter Lane with the cigarette case on a salver.  Algernon takes it at
once.  Lane goes out.]

Algernon.  I think that is rather mean of you, Ernest, I must say.  [Opens
case and examines it.]  However, it makes no matter, for, now that I look
at the inscription inside, I find that the thing isn't yours after all
Algernon.  Oh! it is absurd to have a hard and fast rule about what one
should read and what one shouldn't.  More than half of modern culture
depends on what one shouldn't read
Algernon.  Yes; but this isn't your cigarette case.  This cigarette case
is a present from some one of the name of Cecily, and you said you didn't
know any one of that name
Algernon.  Your aunt!

Jack.  Yes.  Charming old lady she is, too.  Lives at Tunbridge Wells
Algernon.  [Retreating to back of sofa.]  But why does she call herself
little Cecily if she is your aunt and lives at Tunbridge Wells?
[Reading.]  'From little Cecily with her fondest love.'

Jack.  [Moving to sofa and kneeling upon it.]  My dear fellow, what on
earth is there in that?  Some aunts are tall, some aunts are not tall[Follows Algernon round the room.]

Algernon.  Yes.  But why does your aunt call you her uncle?  'From little
Cecily, with her fondest love to her dear Uncle Jack.'  There is no
objection, I admit, to an aunt being a small aunt, but why an aunt, no
matter what her size may be, should call her own nephew her uncle, I
can't quite make out.  Besides, your name isn't Jack at all; it is
Ernest
Algernon.  You have always told me it was Ernest.  I have introduced you
to every one as Ernest.  You answer to the name of Ernest.  You look as
if your name was Ernest.  You are the most earnest-looking person I ever
saw in my life.  It is perfectly absurd your saying that your name isn't
Ernest.  It's on your cards.  Here is one of them.  [Taking it from
case.]  'Mr. Ernest Worthing, B. 4, The Albany.'  I'll keep this as a
proof that your name is Ernest if ever you attempt to deny it to me, or
to Gwendolen, or to any one else.  [Puts the card in his pocket.]

Jack.  Well, my name is Ernest in town and Jack in the country, and the
cigarette case was given to me in the countryCome, old boy, you had much better have the thing out at once
Algernon.  Well, that is exactly what dentists always do.  Now, go on!
Tell me the whole thing.  I may mention that I have always suspected you
of being a confirmed and secret Bunburyist; and I am quite sure of it
now
Jack.  Well, produce my cigarette case first
Algernon.  Where is that place in the country, by the way?

Jack.  That is nothing to you, dear boy.  You are not going to be invited
. . . I may tell you candidly that the place is not in Shropshire
Algernon.  The truth is rarely pure and never simple.  Modern life would
be very tedious if it were either, and modern literature a complete
impossibility!

Jack.  That wouldn't be at all a bad thing
Jack.  What on earth do you mean?

Algernon.  You have invented a very useful younger brother called Ernest,
in order that you may be able to come up to town as often as you like.  I
have invented an invaluable permanent invalid called Bunbury, in order
that I may be able to go down into the country whenever I choose.  Bunbury
is perfectly invaluable.  If it wasn't for Bunbury's extraordinary bad
health, for instance, I wouldn't be able to dine with you at Willis's to-
night, for I have been really engaged to Aunt Augusta for more than a
week
Algernon.  I know.  You are absurdly careless about sending out
invitations.  It is very foolish of you.  Nothing annoys people so much
as not receiving invitations
Algernon.  I haven't the smallest intention of doing anything of the
kind.  To begin with, I dined there on Monday, and once a week is quite
enough to dine with one's own relations.  In the second place, whenever I
do dine there I am always treated as a member of the family, and sent
down with either no woman at all, or two.  In the third place, I know
perfectly well whom she will place me next to, to-night.  She will place
me next Mary Farquhar, who always flirts with her own husband across the
dinner-table.  That is not very pleasant.  Indeed, it is not even decent
. . . and that sort of thing is enormously on the increase.  The amount
of women in London who flirt with their own husbands is perfectly
scandalous.  It looks so bad.  It is simply washing one's clean linen in
public.  Besides, now that I know you to be a confirmed Bunburyist I
naturally want to talk to you about Bunburying.  I want to tell you the
rules. . . with your invalid friend who has the absurd name
Jack.  That is nonsense.  If I marry a charming girl like Gwendolen, and
she is the only girl I ever saw in my life that I would marry, I
certainly won't want to know Bunbury
Jack.  [Sententiously.]  That, my dear young friend, is the theory that
the corrupt French Drama has been propounding for the last fifty years
Jack.  For heaven's sake, don't try to be cynical.  It's perfectly easy
to be cynical
Algernon.  Yes, but you must be serious about it.  I hate people who are
not serious about meals.  It is so shallow of them
[Algernon goes forward to meet them.  Enter Lady Bracknell and
Gwendolen.]

Lady Bracknell.  Good afternoon, dear Algernon, I hope you are behaving
very well
Lady Bracknell.  That's not quite the same thing.  In fact the two things
rarely go together.  [Sees Jack and bows to him with icy coldness.]

Algernon.  [To Gwendolen.]  Dear me, you are smart!

Gwendolen.  I am always smart!  Am I not, Mr. Worthing?

Jack.  You're quite perfect, Miss Fairfax
Algernon.  Certainly, Aunt Augusta.  [Goes over to tea-table.]

Lady Bracknell.  Won't you come and sit here, Gwendolen?

Gwendolen.  Thanks, mamma, I'm quite comfortable where I am
Lane.  [Gravely.]  There were no cucumbers in the market this morning,
sir.  I went down twice
Algernon.  That will do, Lane, thank you
Lady Bracknell.  It really makes no matter, Algernon.  I had some
crumpets with Lady Harbury, who seems to me to be living entirely for
pleasure now
Lady Bracknell.  It certainly has changed its colour.  From what cause I,
of course, cannot say.  [Algernon crosses and hands tea.]  Thank you
Algernon.  I am afraid, Aunt Augusta, I shall have to give up the
pleasure of dining with you to-night after allFortunately he is accustomed to that
Lady Bracknell.  It is very strange.  This Mr. Bunbury seems to suffer
from curiously bad health
Lady Bracknell.  Well, I must say, Algernon, that I think it is high time
that Mr. Bunbury made up his mind whether he was going to live or to dieIllness of any kind is hardly a thing to be encouraged in others.  Health
is the primary duty of life.  I am always telling that to your poor
uncle, but he never seems to take much notice . . . as far as any
improvement in his ailment goes.  I should be much obliged if you would
ask Mr. Bunbury, from me, to be kind enough not to have a relapse on
Saturday, for I rely on you to arrange my music for me.  It is my last
reception, and one wants something that will encourage conversation,
particularly at the end of the season when every one has practically said
whatever they had to say, which, in most cases, was probably not much
Lady Bracknell.  Thank you, Algernon.  It is very thoughtful of youGwendolen, you will accompany me
[Lady Bracknell and Algernon go into the music-room, Gwendolen remains
behind.]

Jack.  Charming day it has been, Miss FairfaxWhenever people talk to me about the weather, I always feel quite certain
that they mean something else.  And that makes me so nervous
Gwendolen.  I thought so.  In fact, I am never wrong
Gwendolen.  I would certainly advise you to do so.  Mamma has a way of
coming back suddenly into a room that I have often had to speak to her
about
Gwendolen.  Yes, I am quite well aware of the fact.  And I often wish
that in public, at any rate, you had been more demonstrative.  For me you
have always had an irresistible fascination.  Even before I met you I was
far from indifferent to you.  [Jack looks at her in amazement.]  We live,
as I hope you know, Mr. Worthing, in an age of ideals.  The fact is
constantly mentioned in the more expensive monthly magazines, and has
reached the provincial pulpits, I am told; and my ideal has always been
to love some one of the name of Ernest.  There is something in that name
that inspires absolute confidence.  The moment Algernon first mentioned
to me that he had a friend called Ernest, I knew I was destined to love
you
Gwendolen.  My own Ernest!

Jack.  But you don't really mean to say that you couldn't love me if my
name wasn't Ernest?

Gwendolen.  But your name is Ernest
Jack.  Personally, darling, to speak quite candidly, I don't much care
about the name of Ernest . . . I don't think the name suits me at all
Jack.  Well, really, Gwendolen, I must say that I think there are lots of
other much nicer names.  I think Jack, for instance, a charming name
Jack.  Gwendolen, I must get christened at once--I mean we must get
married at once.  There is no time to be lost
Gwendolen.  I adore you.  But you haven't proposed to me yet.  Nothing
has been said at all about marriage.  The subject has not even been
touched on
Jack.  Gwendolen!

Gwendolen.  Yes, Mr. Worthing, what have you got to say to me?

Jack.  You know what I have got to say to you
Jack.  Gwendolen, will you marry me?  [Goes on his knees.]

Gwendolen.  Of course I will, darling.  How long you have been about it!
I am afraid you have had very little experience in how to propose
Gwendolen.  Yes, but men often propose for practice.  I know my brother
Gerald does.  All my girl-friends tell me so.  What wonderfully blue eyes
you have, Ernest!  They are quite, quite, blue.  I hope you will always
look at me just like that, especially when there are other people
present.  [Enter Lady Bracknell.]

Lady Bracknell.  Mr. Worthing!  Rise, sir, from this semi-recumbent
posture.  It is most indecorous
Lady Bracknell.  Finished what, may I ask?

Gwendolen.  I am engaged to Mr. Worthing, mamma.  [They rise together.]

Lady Bracknell.  Pardon me, you are not engaged to any one.  When you do
become engaged to some one, I, or your father, should his health permit
him, will inform you of the fact.  An engagement should come on a young
girl as a surprise, pleasant or unpleasant, as the case may be.  It is
hardly a matter that she could be allowed to arrange for herself . . 
Gwendolen.  [Reproachfully.]  Mamma!

Lady Bracknell.  In the carriage, Gwendolen!  [Gwendolen goes to the
door.  She and Jack blow kisses to each other behind Lady Bracknell's
back.  Lady Bracknell looks vaguely about as if she could not understand
what the noise was.  Finally turns round.]  Gwendolen, the carriage!

Gwendolen.  Yes, mamma.  [Goes out, looking back at Jack.]

Lady Bracknell.  [Sitting down.]  You can take a seat, Mr. Worthing
Lady Bracknell.  [Pencil and note-book in hand.]  I feel bound to tell
you that you are not down on my list of eligible young men, although I
have the same list as the dear Duchess of Bolton has.  We work together,
in fact.  However, I am quite ready to enter your name, should your
answers be what a really affectionate mother requires.  Do you smoke?

Jack.  Well, yes, I must admit I smoke
Lady Bracknell.  A very good age to be married at.  I have always been of
opinion that a man who desires to get married should know either
everything or nothing.  Which do you know?

Jack.  [After some hesitation.]  I know nothing, Lady Bracknell
Lady Bracknell.  [Makes a note in her book.]  In land, or in investments?

Jack.  In investments, chiefly
Jack.  I have a country house with some land, of course, attached to it,
about fifteen hundred acres, I believe; but I don't depend on that for my
real income.  In fact, as far as I can make out, the poachers are the
only people who make anything out of it
Jack.  Well, I own a house in Belgrave Square, but it is let by the year
to Lady Bloxham.  Of course, I can get it back whenever I like, at six
months' notice
Jack.  Oh, she goes about very little.  She is a lady considerably
advanced in years
Lady Bracknell.  [Shaking her head.]  The unfashionable side.  I thought
there was something.  However, that could easily be altered
Lady Bracknell.  Oh, they count as Tories.  They dine with us.  Or come
in the evening, at any rate.  Now to minor matters.  Are your parents
living?

Jack.  I have lost both my parents
Lady Bracknell.  Found!

Jack.  The late Mr. Thomas Cardew, an old gentleman of a very charitable
and kindly disposition, found me, and gave me the name of Worthing,
because he happened to have a first-class ticket for Worthing in his
pocket at the time.  Worthing is a place in Sussex.  It is a seaside
resort
Lady Bracknell.  A hand-bag?

Jack.  [Very seriously.]  Yes, Lady Bracknell.  I was in a hand-bag--a
somewhat large, black leather hand-bag, with handles to it--an ordinary
hand-bag in fact
Lady Bracknell.  The cloak-room at Victoria Station?

Jack.  Yes.  The Brighton line
Jack.  May I ask you then what you would advise me to do?  I need hardly
say I would do anything in the world to ensure Gwendolen's happiness
Jack.  Well, I don't see how I could possibly manage to do that.  I can
produce the hand-bag at any moment.  It is in my dressing-room at home.  I
really think that should satisfy you, Lady Bracknell
Jack.  Oh, Gwendolen is as right as a trivet.  As far as she is
concerned, we are engaged.  Her mother is perfectly unbearable.  Never
met such a Gorgon . . . I don't really know what a Gorgon is like, but I
am quite sure that Lady Bracknell is one.  In any case, she is a monster,
without being a myth, which is rather unfair . . . I beg your pardon,
Algy, I suppose I shouldn't talk about your own aunt in that way before
you
Jack.  Oh, that is nonsense!

Algernon.  It isn't!

Jack.  Well, I won't argue about the matter.  You always want to argue
about things
Jack.  Upon my word, if I thought that, I'd shoot myself . . . [A pause.]
You don't think there is any chance of Gwendolen becoming like her mother
in about a hundred and fifty years, do you, Algy?

Algernon.  All women become like their mothers.  That is their tragedy
Jack.  Is that clever?

Algernon.  It is perfectly phrased! and quite as true as any observation
in civilised life should beYou can't go anywhere without meeting clever people.  The thing has
become an absolute public nuisance.  I wish to goodness we had a few
fools left
Jack.  I should extremely like to meet them.  What do they talk about?

Algernon.  The fools?  Oh! about the clever people, of course
Jack.  Oh, that is nonsense
Jack.  You are sure a severe chill isn't hereditary, or anything of that
kind?

Algernon.  Of course it isn't!

Jack.  Very well, then.  My poor brother Ernest to carried off suddenly,
in Paris, by a severe chill.  That gets rid of him
Algernon.  I would rather like to see Cecily
Algernon.  Have you told Gwendolen yet that you have an excessively
pretty ward who is only just eighteen?

Jack.  Oh! one doesn't blurt these things out to people.  Cecily and
Gwendolen are perfectly certain to be extremely great friends.  I'll bet
you anything you like that half an hour after they have met, they will be
calling each other sister
Algernon.  Well, I'm hungry
Algernon.  What shall we do after dinner?  Go to a theatre?

Jack.  Oh no!  I loathe listening
Algernon.  Well, we might trot round to the Empire at ten?

Jack.  Oh, no!  I can't bear looking at things.  It is so silly
[Enter Lane.]

Lane.  Miss Fairfax
Algernon.  Really, Gwendolen, I don't think I can allow this at all
Jack.  Dear Gwendolen!

Gwendolen.  The story of your romantic origin, as related to me by mamma,
with unpleasing comments, has naturally stirred the deeper fibres of my
nature.  Your Christian name has an irresistible fascination.  The
simplicity of your character makes you exquisitely incomprehensible to
me.  Your town address at the Albany I have.  What is your address in the
country?

Jack.  The Manor House, Woolton, Hertfordshire
Jack.  My own one!

Gwendolen.  How long do you remain in town?

Jack.  Till Monday
Algernon.  Thanks, I've turned round already
Jack.  You will let me see you to your carriage, my own darling?

Gwendolen.  Certainly
Lane.  Yes, sir.  [Jack and Gwendolen go off.]

[Lane presents several letters on a salver to Algernon.  It is to be
surmised that they are bills, as Algernon, after looking at the
envelopes, tears them up.]

Algernon.  A glass of sherry, Lane
Algernon.  To-morrow, Lane, I'm going Bunburying
Algernon.  I shall probably not be back till Monday.  You can put up my
dress clothes, my smoking jacket, and all the Bunbury suits . . 
Lane.  It never is, sir
Lane.  I do my best to give satisfaction, sir
Jack.  If you don't take care, your friend Bunbury will get you into a
serious scrape some day
Jack.  Oh, that's nonsense, Algy.  You never talk anything but nonsense
[Jack looks indignantly at him, and leaves the room.  Algernon lights a
cigarette, reads his shirt-cuff, and smiles.]

ACT DROP




SECOND ACT


SCENE


Garden at the Manor House.  A flight of grey stone steps leads up to the
house.  The garden, an old-fashioned one, full of roses.  Time of year,
July.  Basket chairs, and a table covered with books, are set under a
large yew-treeYour German grammar is on the table.  Pray open it at page fifteen.  We
will repeat yesterday's lesson
Miss Prism.  Child, you know how anxious your guardian is that you should
improve yourself in every way.  He laid particular stress on your German,
as he was leaving for town yesterday.  Indeed, he always lays stress on
your German when he is leaving for town
Miss Prism.  [Drawing herself up.]  Your guardian enjoys the best of
health, and his gravity of demeanour is especially to be commended in one
so comparatively young as he is.  I know no one who has a higher sense of
duty and responsibility
Miss Prism.  Cecily!  I am surprised at you.  Mr. Worthing has many
troubles in his life.  Idle merriment and triviality would be out of
place in his conversation.  You must remember his constant anxiety about
that unfortunate young man his brother
Cecily.  I keep a diary in order to enter the wonderful secrets of my
life.  If I didn't write them down, I should probably forget all about
them
Cecily.  Yes, but it usually chronicles the things that have never
happened, and couldn't possibly have happened.  I believe that Memory is
responsible for nearly all the three-volume novels that Mudie sends usI wrote one myself in earlier days
Miss Prism.  The good ended happily, and the bad unhappily.  That is what
Fiction means[Cecily starts.]  I use the word in the sense of lost or mislaid.  To
your work, child, these speculations are profitless
Miss Prism.  [Rising and advancing.]  Dr. Chasuble!  This is indeed a
pleasure
Miss Prism.  Cecily, I have not mentioned anything about a headache
Chasuble.  I hope, Cecily, you are not inattentive
Chasuble.  That is strange.  Were I fortunate enough to be Miss Prism's
pupil, I would hang upon her lips.  [Miss Prism glares.]  I spoke
metaphorically.--My metaphor was drawn from bees.  Ahem!  Mr. Worthing, I
suppose, has not returned from town yet?

Miss Prism.  We do not expect him till Monday afternoon
Miss Prism.  Egeria?  My name is Laetitia, Doctor
Chasuble.  With pleasure, Miss Prism, with pleasure.  We might go as far
as the schools and back
[Goes down the garden with Dr. Chasuble.]

Cecily.  [Picks up books and throws them back on table.]  Horrid
Political Economy!  Horrid Geography!  Horrid, horrid German!

[Enter Merriman with a card on a salver.]

Merriman.  Mr. Ernest Worthing has just driven over from the station.  He
has brought his luggage with him
Cecily.  Ask Mr. Ernest Worthing to come here.  I suppose you had better
talk to the housekeeper about a room for him
[Merriman goes off.]

Cecily.  I have never met any really wicked person before.  I feel rather
frightened.  I am so afraid he will look just like every one else
Cecily.  You are under some strange mistake.  I am not little.  In fact,
I believe I am more than usually tall for my age.  [Algernon is rather
taken aback.]  But I am your cousin Cecily.  You, I see from your card,
are Uncle Jack's brother, my cousin Ernest, my wicked cousin Ernest
Cecily.  If you are not, then you have certainly been deceiving us all in
a very inexcusable manner.  I hope you have not been leading a double
life, pretending to be wicked and being really good all the time.  That
would be hypocrisy
Cecily.  I am glad to hear it
Cecily.  I don't think you should be so proud of that, though I am sure
it must have been very pleasant
Cecily.  I can't understand how you are here at all.  Uncle Jack won't be
back till Monday afternoon
Cecily.  Well, I know, of course, how important it is not to keep a
business engagement, if one wants to retain any sense of the beauty of
life, but still I think you had better wait till Uncle Jack arrives.  I
know he wants to speak to you about your emigrating
Algernon.  I certainly wouldn't let Jack buy my outfit.  He has no taste
in neckties at all
Algernon.  Australia!  I'd sooner die
Algernon.  Oh, well!  The accounts I have received of Australia and the
next world, are not particularly encouraging.  This world is good enough
for me, cousin CecilyYou might make that your mission, if you don't mind, cousin Cecily
Algernon.  Well, would you mind my reforming myself this afternoon?

Cecily.  It is rather Quixotic of you.  But I think you should try
Cecily.  You are looking a little worse
Cecily.  How thoughtless of me.  I should have remembered that when one
is going to lead an entirely new life, one requires regular and wholesome
meals.  Won't you come in?

Algernon.  Thank you.  Might I have a buttonhole first?  I never have any
appetite unless I have a buttonhole first
Cecily.  Why?  [Cuts a flower.]

Algernon.  Because you are like a pink rose, Cousin CecilyMiss Prism never says such things to me
Cecily.  Miss Prism says that all good looks are a snare
Cecily.  Oh, I don't think I would care to catch a sensible man.  I
shouldn't know what to talk to him about
Miss Prism.  [Sententiously.]  That is obviously the reason why the
Primitive Church has not lasted up to the present day.  And you do not
seem to realise, dear Doctor, that by persistently remaining single, a
man converts himself into a permanent public temptation.  Men should be
more careful; this very celibacy leads weaker vessels astray
Chasuble.  And often, I've been told, not even to herMaturity can always be depended on.  Ripeness can be trusted.  Young
women are green.  [Dr. Chasuble starts.]  I spoke horticulturally.  My
metaphor was drawn from fruits.  But where is Cecily?

Chasuble.  Perhaps she followed us to the schools
Jack.  [Shakes Miss Prism's hand in a tragic manner.]  I have returned
sooner than I expected.  Dr. Chasuble, I hope you are well?

Chasuble.  Dear Mr. Worthing, I trust this garb of woe does not betoken
some terrible calamity?

Jack.  My brother
Miss Prism.  What a lesson for him!  I trust he will profit by it
Jack.  Poor Ernest!  He had many faults, but it is a sad, sad blow
Chasuble.  Was the cause of death mentioned?

Jack.  A severe chill, it seems
Chasuble.  [Raising his hand.]  Charity, dear Miss Prism, charity!  None
of us are perfect.  I myself am peculiarly susceptible to draughts.  Will
the interment take place here?

Jack.  No.  He seems to have expressed a desire to be buried in Paris
Jack.  Ah! that reminds me, you mentioned christenings I think, Dr
Chasuble.  But is there any particular infant in whom you are interested,
Mr. Worthing?  Your brother was, I believe, unmarried, was he not?

Jack.  Oh yes
Jack.  But it is not for any child, dear Doctor.  I am very fond of
children.  No! the fact is, I would like to be christened myself, this
afternoon, if you have nothing better to do
Chasuble.  But have you any grave doubts on the subject?

Jack.  I certainly intend to have.  Of course I don't know if the thing
would bother you in any way, or if you think I am a little too old now
Jack.  Immersion!

Chasuble.  You need have no apprehensions.  Sprinkling is all that is
necessary, or indeed I think advisable.  Our weather is so changeable.  At
what hour would you wish the ceremony performed?

Jack.  Oh, I might trot round about five if that would suit you
Jack.  Oh!  I don't see much fun in being christened along with other
babies.  It would be childish.  Would half-past five do?

Chasuble.  Admirably!  Admirably!  [Takes out watch.]  And now, dear Mr
Miss Prism.  This seems to me a blessing of an extremely obvious kind
Miss Prism.  Cecily!

Chasuble.  My child! my child!  [Cecily goes towards Jack; he kisses her
brow in a melancholy manner.]

Cecily.  What is the matter, Uncle Jack?  Do look happy!  You look as if
you had toothache, and I have got such a surprise for you.  Who do you
think is in the dining-room?  Your brother!

Jack.  Who?

Cecily.  Your brother Ernest.  He arrived about half an hour ago
Cecily.  Oh, don't say that.  However badly he may have behaved to you in
the past he is still your brother.  You couldn't be so heartless as to
disown him.  I'll tell him to come out.  And you will shake hands with
him, won't you, Uncle Jack?  [Runs back into the house.]

Chasuble.  These are very joyful tidings
Jack.  My brother is in the dining-room?  I don't know what it all means
[Enter Algernon and Cecily hand in hand.  They come slowly up to Jack.]

Jack.  Good heavens!  [Motions Algernon away.]

Algernon.  Brother John, I have come down from town to tell you that I am
very sorry for all the trouble I have given you, and that I intend to
lead a better life in the future.  [Jack glares at him and does not take
his hand.]

Cecily.  Uncle Jack, you are not going to refuse your own brother's hand?

Jack.  Nothing will induce me to take his hand.  I think his coming down
here disgraceful.  He knows perfectly well why
Jack.  Oh! he has been talking about Bunbury, has he?

Cecily.  Yes, he has told me all about poor Mr. Bunbury, and his terrible
state of health
Algernon.  Of course I admit that the faults were all on my side.  But I
must say that I think that Brother John's coldness to me is peculiarly
painful.  I expected a more enthusiastic welcome, especially considering
it is the first time I have come here
Jack.  Never forgive me?

Cecily.  Never, never, never!

Jack.  Well, this is the last time I shall ever do it.  [Shakes with
Algernon and glares.]

Chasuble.  It's pleasant, is it not, to see so perfect a reconciliation?
I think we might leave the two brothers together
Cecily.  Certainly, Miss Prism.  My little task of reconciliation is
over
Miss Prism.  We must not be premature in our judgments
[Enter Merriman.]

Merriman.  I have put Mr. Ernest's things in the room next to yours, sir
Jack.  His luggage?

Merriman.  Yes, sir.  Three portmanteaus, a dressing-case, two hat-boxes,
and a large luncheon-basket
Jack.  Merriman, order the dog-cart at once.  Mr. Ernest has been
suddenly called back to town
Jack.  Yes, you have
Jack.  Your duty as a gentleman calls you back
Jack.  I can quite understand that
Jack.  You are not to talk of Miss Cardew like that.  I don't like it
Jack.  You are certainly not staying with me for a whole week as a guest
or anything else.  You have got to leave . . . by the four-five train
Jack.  Well, will you go if I change my clothes?

Algernon.  Yes, if you are not too long.  I never saw anybody take so
long to dress, and with such little result
Algernon.  If I am occasionally a little over-dressed, I make up for it
by being always immensely over-educated
[Goes into the house.]

Algernon.  I think it has been a great success.  I'm in love with Cecily,
and that is everything
Cecily.  Oh, I merely came back to water the roses.  I thought you were
with Uncle Jack
Cecily.  Oh, is he going to take you for a nice drive?

Algernon.  He's going to send me away
Cecily.  It is always painful to part from people whom one has known for
a very brief space of time.  The absence of old friends one can endure
with equanimity.  But even a momentary separation from anyone to whom one
has just been introduced is almost unbearable
[Enter Merriman.]

Merriman.  The dog-cart is at the door, sir.  [Algernon looks appealingly
at Cecily.]

Cecily.  It can wait, Merriman for . . . five minutes
Cecily.  I think your frankness does you great credit, Ernest.  If you
will allow me, I will copy your remarks into my diary.  [Goes over to
table and begins writing in diary.]

Algernon.  Do you really keep a diary?  I'd give anything to look at it
Algernon.  [Somewhat taken aback.]  Ahem!  Ahem!

Cecily.  Oh, don't cough, Ernest.  When one is dictating one should speak
fluently and not cough.  Besides, I don't know how to spell a cough
Cecily.  I don't think that you should tell me that you love me wildly,
passionately, devotedly, hopelessly.  Hopelessly doesn't seem to make
much sense, does it?

Algernon.  Cecily!

[Enter Merriman.]

Merriman.  The dog-cart is waiting, sir
Merriman.  [Looks at Cecily, who makes no sign.]  Yes, sir
Algernon.  Oh, I don't care about Jack.  I don't care for anybody in the
whole world but you.  I love you, Cecily.  You will marry me, won't you?

Cecily.  You silly boy!  Of course.  Why, we have been engaged for the
last three months
Algernon.  But how did we become engaged?

Cecily.  Well, ever since dear Uncle Jack first confessed to us that he
had a younger brother who was very wicked and bad, you of course have
formed the chief topic of conversation between myself and Miss Prism.  And
of course a man who is much talked about is always very attractive.  One
feels there must be something in him, after all.  I daresay it was
foolish of me, but I fell in love with you, Ernest
Algernon.  Did I give you this?  It's very pretty, isn't it?

Cecily.  Yes, you've wonderfully good taste, Ernest.  It's the excuse
I've always given for your leading such a bad life.  And this is the box
in which I keep all your dear letters.  [Kneels at table, opens box, and
produces letters tied up with blue ribbon.]

Algernon.  My letters!  But, my own sweet Cecily, I have never written
you any letters
Algernon.  Oh, do let me read them, Cecily?

Cecily.  Oh, I couldn't possibly.  They would make you far too conceited
Algernon.  But was our engagement ever broken off?

Cecily.  Of course it was.  On the 22nd of last March.  You can see the
entry if you like. [Shows diary.]  'To-day I broke off my engagement with
Ernest.  I feel it is better to do so.  The weather still continues
charming.'

Algernon.  But why on earth did you break it off?  What had I done?  I
had done nothing at all.  Cecily, I am very much hurt indeed to hear you
broke it off.  Particularly when the weather was so charming
Algernon.  [Crossing to her, and kneeling.]  What a perfect angel you
are, Cecily
Cecily.  I am so glad
Algernon.  Yes, of course.  [Nervously.]

Cecily.  You must not laugh at me, darling, but it had always been a
girlish dream of mine to love some one whose name was Ernest.  [Algernon
rises, Cecily also.]  There is something in that name that seems to
inspire absolute confidence.  I pity any poor married woman whose husband
is not called Ernest
Cecily.  But I don't like the name of Algernon
Algernon.  Ahem!  Cecily!  [Picking up hat.]  Your Rector here is, I
suppose, thoroughly experienced in the practice of all the rites and
ceremonials of the Church?

Cecily.  Oh, yes.  Dr. Chasuble is a most learned man.  He has never
written a single book, so you can imagine how much he knows
Cecily.  Oh!

Algernon.  I shan't be away more than half an hourCouldn't you make it twenty minutes?

Algernon.  I'll be back in no time
[Enter Merriman.]

Merriman.  A Miss Fairfax has just called to see Mr. Worthing.  On very
important business, Miss Fairfax states
Cecily.  Pray ask the lady to come out here; Mr. Worthing is sure to be
back soon.  And you can bring tea
[Enter Merriman.]

Merriman.  Miss FairfaxMy name is Cecily Cardew
Cecily.  How nice of you to like me so much after we have known each
other such a comparatively short time.  Pray sit down
Gwendolen.  Then that is all quite settled, is it not?

Cecily.  I hope so.  [A pause.  They both sit down together.]

Gwendolen.  Perhaps this might be a favourable opportunity for my
mentioning who I am.  My father is Lord Bracknell.  You have never heard
of papa, I suppose?

Cecily.  I don't think soCecily, mamma, whose views on education are remarkably strict, has
brought me up to be extremely short-sighted; it is part of her system; so
do you mind my looking at you through my glasses?

Cecily.  Oh! not at all, Gwendolen.  I am very fond of being looked at
Cecily.  Oh no!  I live here
Gwendolen.  Indeed?

Cecily.  My dear guardian, with the assistance of Miss Prism, has the
arduous task of looking after me
Gwendolen.  Oh!  It is strange he never mentioned to me that he had a
ward.  How secretive of him!  He grows more interesting hourly.  I am not
sure, however, that the news inspires me with feelings of unmixed
delight.  [Rising and going to her.]  I am very fond of you, Cecily; I
have liked you ever since I met you!  But I am bound to state that now
that I know that you are Mr. Worthing's ward, I cannot help expressing a
wish you were--well, just a little older than you seem to be--and not
quite so very alluring in appearance.  In fact, if I may speak candidly--

Cecily.  Pray do!  I think that whenever one has anything unpleasant to
say, one should always be quite candidDisloyalty would be as impossible to him as deception.  But even men of
the noblest possible moral character are extremely susceptible to the
influence of the physical charms of others.  Modern, no less than Ancient
History, supplies us with many most painful examples of what I refer to
Cecily.  I beg your pardon, Gwendolen, did you say Ernest?

Gwendolen.  Yes
Gwendolen.  [Sitting down again.]  Ernest never mentioned to me that he
had a brother
Gwendolen.  Ah! that accounts for it.  And now that I think of it I have
never heard any man mention his brother.  The subject seems distasteful
to most men.  Cecily, you have lifted a load from my mind.  I was growing
almost anxious.  It would have been terrible if any cloud had come across
a friendship like ours, would it not?  Of course you are quite, quite
sure that it is not Mr. Ernest Worthing who is your guardian?

Cecily.  Quite sure.  [A pause.]  In fact, I am going to be his
Gwendolen.  [Quite politely, rising.]  My darling Cecily, I think there
must be some slight error.  Mr. Ernest Worthing is engaged to me.  The
announcement will appear in the _Morning Post_ on Saturday at the latest[Produces diary of her own.]  I never travel without my diary.  One
should always have something sensational to read in the train.  I am so
sorry, dear Cecily, if it is any disappointment to you, but I am afraid I
have the prior claim
Gwendolen.  [Meditatively.]  If the poor fellow has been entrapped into
any foolish promise I shall consider it my duty to rescue him at once,
and with a firm hand
Gwendolen.  Do you allude to me, Miss Cardew, as an entanglement?  You
are presumptuous.  On an occasion of this kind it becomes more than a
moral duty to speak one's mind.  It becomes a pleasure
Gwendolen.  [Satirically.]  I am glad to say that I have never seen a
spade.  It is obvious that our social spheres have been widely different
Gwendolen.  Five counties!  I don't think I should like that; I hate
crowds
Cecily.  So glad you like it, Miss Fairfax
Cecily.  Oh, flowers are as common here, Miss Fairfax, as people are in
London
Cecily.  Ah!  This is what the newspapers call agricultural depression,
is it not?  I believe the aristocracy are suffering very much from it
just at present.  It is almost an epidemic amongst them, I have been
told.  May I offer you some tea, Miss Fairfax?

Gwendolen.  [With elaborate politeness.]  Thank you.  [Aside.]  Detestable
girl!  But I require tea!

Cecily.  [Sweetly.]  Sugar?

Gwendolen.  [Superciliously.]  No, thank you.  Sugar is not fashionable
any more. [Cecily looks angrily at her, takes up the tongs and puts four
lumps of sugar into the cup.]

Cecily.  [Severely.]  Cake or bread and butter?

Gwendolen.  [In a bored manner.]  Bread and butter, please.  Cake is
rarely seen at the best houses nowadays
[Merriman does so, and goes out with footman.  Gwendolen drinks the tea
and makes a grimace.  Puts down cup at once, reaches out her hand to the
bread and butter, looks at it, and finds it is cake.  Rises in
indignation.]

Gwendolen.  You have filled my tea with lumps of sugar, and though I
asked most distinctly for bread and butter, you have given me cake.  I am
known for the gentleness of my disposition, and the extraordinary
sweetness of my nature, but I warn you, Miss Cardew, you may go too far
Gwendolen.  From the moment I saw you I distrusted you.  I felt that you
were false and deceitful.  I am never deceived in such matters.  My first
impressions of people are invariably right
[Enter Jack.]

Gwendolen.  [Catching sight of him.]  Ernest!  My own Ernest!

Jack.  Gwendolen!  Darling!  [Offers to kiss her.]

Gwendolen.  [Draws back.]  A moment!  May I ask if you are engaged to be
married to this young lady?  [Points to Cecily.]

Jack.  [Laughing.]  To dear little Cecily!  Of course not!  What could
have put such an idea into your pretty little head?

Gwendolen.  Thank you.  You may!  [Offers her cheek.]

Cecily.  [Very sweetly.]  I knew there must be some misunderstanding,
Miss Fairfax.  The gentleman whose arm is at present round your waist is
my guardian, Mr. John Worthing
Gwendolen.  [Receding.]  Jack!  Oh!

[Enter Algernon.]

Cecily.  Here is Ernest
Algernon.  [Laughing.]  Of course not!  What could have put such an idea
into your pretty little head?

Cecily.  Thank you.  [Presenting her cheek to be kissed.]  You may
Cecily.  [Breaking away from Algernon.]  Algernon Moncrieff!  Oh!  [The
two girls move towards each other and put their arms round each other's
waists as if for protection.]

Cecily.  Are you called Algernon?

Algernon.  I cannot deny it
Cecily.  [To Gwendolen.]  A gross deception has been practised on both of
us
Gwendolen.  An admirable idea!  Mr. Worthing, there is just one question
I would like to be permitted to put to you.  Where is your brother
Ernest?  We are both engaged to be married to your brother Ernest, so it
is a matter of some importance to us to know where your brother Ernest is
at present
Cecily.  [Surprised.]  No brother at all?

Jack.  [Cheerily.]  None!

Gwendolen.  [Severely.]  Had you never a brother of any kind?

Jack.  [Pleasantly.]  Never.  Not even of any kind
Cecily.  It is not a very pleasant position for a young girl suddenly to
find herself in.  Is it?

Gwendolen.  Let us go into the house.  They will hardly venture to come
after us there
Jack.  Well, you've no right whatsoever to Bunbury here
Jack.  Serious Bunburyist!  Good heavens!

Algernon.  Well, one must be serious about something, if one wants to
have any amusement in life.  I happen to be serious about BunburyingAbout everything, I should fancy.  You have such an absolutely trivial
nature
Algernon.  Your brother is a little off colour, isn't he, dear Jack?  You
won't be able to disappear to London quite so frequently as your wicked
custom was.  And not a bad thing eitherTo say nothing of the fact that she is my wardTo say nothing of the fact that she is my cousin
Algernon.  Well, I simply wanted to be engaged to Cecily.  I adore her
Algernon.  I don't think there is much likelihood, Jack, of you and Miss
Fairfax being united
Algernon.  If it was my business, I wouldn't talk about it.  [Begins to
eat muffins.]  It is very vulgar to talk about one's business.  Only
people like stock-brokers do that, and then merely at dinner parties
Algernon.  Well, I can't eat muffins in an agitated manner.  The butter
would probably get on my cuffs.  One should always eat muffins quite
calmly.  It is the only way to eat them
Algernon.  When I am in trouble, eating is the only thing that consoles
me.  Indeed, when I am in really great trouble, as any one who knows me
intimately will tell you, I refuse everything except food and drink.  At
the present moment I am eating muffins because I am unhappy.  Besides, I
am particularly fond of muffins.  [Rising.]

Jack.  [Rising.]  Well, that is no reason why you should eat them all in
that greedy way. [Takes muffins from Algernon.]

Algernon.  [Offering tea-cake.]  I wish you would have tea-cake instead
Jack.  Good heavens!  I suppose a man may eat his own muffins in his own
garden
Jack.  I said it was perfectly heartless of you, under the circumstances
Algernon.  That may be.  But the muffins are the same.  [He seizes the
muffin-dish from Jack.]

Jack.  Algy, I wish to goodness you would goIt's absurd.  I never go without my dinner.  No one ever does, except
vegetarians and people like that.  Besides I have just made arrangements
with Dr. Chasuble to be christened at a quarter to six under the name of
Ernest
Algernon.  Yes, but I have not been christened for years
Algernon.  Quite so.  So I know my constitution can stand it.  If you are
not quite sure about your ever having been christened, I must say I think
it rather dangerous your venturing on it now.  It might make you very
unwell.  You can hardly have forgotten that some one very closely
connected with you was very nearly carried off this week in Paris by a
severe chill
Algernon.  It usen't to be, I know--but I daresay it is now.  Science is
always making wonderful improvements in things
Algernon.  Jack, you are at the muffins again!  I wish you wouldn't
Jack.  But I hate tea-cakeWhy don't you go!

Algernon.  I haven't quite finished my tea yet! and there is still one
muffin left.  [Jack groans, and sinks into a chair.  Algernon still
continues eating.]

ACT DROP




THIRD ACT


SCENE


Morning-room at the Manor House
Cecily.  They have been eating muffins.  That looks like repentanceCouldn't you cough?

Cecily.  But I haven't got a cough
Gwendolen.  Let us preserve a dignified silence
Cecily.  A most distasteful one
Cecily.  Certainly notMuch depends on your reply
Cecily.  [To Gwendolen.]  That certainly seems a satisfactory
explanation, does it not?

Gwendolen.  Yes, dear, if you can believe him
Gwendolen.  True.  In matters of grave importance, style, not sincerity
is the vital thing.  Mr. Worthing, what explanation can you offer to me
for pretending to have a brother?  Was it in order that you might have an
opportunity of coming up to town to see me as often as possible?

Jack.  Can you doubt it, Miss Fairfax?

Gwendolen.  I have the gravest doubts upon the subject.  But I intend to
crush them.  This is not the moment for German scepticism.  [Moving to
Cecily.]  Their explanations appear to be quite satisfactory, especially
Mr. Worthing's.  That seems to me to have the stamp of truth upon it
Gwendolen.  Then you think we should forgive them?

Cecily.  Yes.  I mean no
Cecily.  Could we not both speak at the same time?

Gwendolen.  An excellent idea!  I nearly always speak at the same time as
other people.  Will you take the time from me?

Cecily.  Certainly.  [Gwendolen beats time with uplifted finger.]

Gwendolen and Cecily [Speaking together.]  Your Christian names are still
an insuperable barrier.  That is all!

Jack and Algernon [Speaking together.]  Our Christian names!  Is that
all?  But we are going to be christened this afternoon
Cecily.  [To Algernon.]  To please me you are ready to face this fearful
ordeal?

Algernon.  I am!

Gwendolen.  How absurd to talk of the equality of the sexes!  Where
questions of self-sacrifice are concerned, men are infinitely beyond us
Gwendolen.  [To Jack.]  Darling!

Algernon.  [To Cecily.]  Darling!  [They fall into each other's arms.]

[Enter Merriman.  When he enters he coughs loudly, seeing the situation.]

Merriman.  Ahem!  Ahem!  Lady Bracknell!

Jack.  Good heavens!

[Enter Lady Bracknell.  The couples separate in alarm.  Exit Merriman.]

Lady Bracknell.  Gwendolen!  What does this mean?

Gwendolen.  Merely that I am engaged to be married to Mr. Worthing,
mamma
Jack.  I am engaged to be married to Gwendolen, Lady Bracknell!

Lady Bracknell.  You are nothing of the kind, sir.  And now, as regards
Algernon! . . . Algernon!

Algernon.  Yes, Aunt Augusta
Lady Bracknell.  Dead!  When did Mr. Bunbury die?  His death must have
been extremely sudden
Lady Bracknell.  What did he die of?

Algernon.  Bunbury?  Oh, he was quite exploded
Algernon.  My dear Aunt Augusta, I mean he was found out!  The doctors
found out that Bunbury could not live, that is what I mean--so Bunbury
diedAnd now that we have finally got rid of this Mr. Bunbury, may I ask, Mr
Lady Bracknell.  I beg your pardon?

Cecily.  Mr. Moncrieff and I are engaged to be married, Lady Bracknell
Lady Bracknell.  That sounds not unsatisfactory.  Three addresses always
inspire confidence, even in tradesmen.  But what proof have I of their
authenticity?

Jack.  I have carefully preserved the Court Guides of the period.  They
are open to your inspection, Lady Bracknell
Jack.  Miss Cardew's family solicitors are Messrs. Markby, Markby, and
MarkbyMarkby's is occasionally to be seen at dinner parties.  So far I am
satisfied
Lady Bracknell.  Ah! A life crowded with incident, I see; though perhaps
somewhat too exciting for a young girl.  I am not myself in favour of
premature experiences.  [Rises, looks at her watch.]  Gwendolen! the time
approaches for our departure.  We have not a moment to lose.  As a matter
of form, Mr. Worthing, I had better ask you if Miss Cardew has any little
fortune?

Jack.  Oh! about a hundred and thirty thousand pounds in the Funds.  That
is all.  Goodbye, Lady Bracknell.  So pleased to have seen you
Jack.  And after six months nobody knew her
Algernon.  Cecily is the sweetest, dearest, prettiest girl in the whole
world.  And I don't care twopence about social possibilitiesBut I do not approve of mercenary marriages.  When I married Lord
Bracknell I had no fortune of any kind.  But I never dreamed for a moment
of allowing that to stand in my way.  Well, I suppose I must give my
consent
Lady Bracknell.  Cecily, you may kiss me!

Cecily.  [Kisses her.]  Thank you, Lady Bracknell
Cecily.  Thank you, Aunt Augusta
Algernon.  Thank you, Aunt Augusta
Lady Bracknell.  To speak frankly, I am not in favour of long
engagements.  They give people the opportunity of finding out each
other's character before marriage, which I think is never advisable
Lady Bracknell.  Upon what grounds may I ask?  Algernon is an extremely,
I may almost say an ostentatiously, eligible young man.  He has nothing,
but he looks everything.  What more can one desire?

Jack.  It pains me very much to have to speak frankly to you, Lady
Bracknell, about your nephew, but the fact is that I do not approve at
all of his moral character.  I suspect him of being untruthful.  [Algernon
and Cecily look at him in indignant amazement.]

Lady Bracknell.  Untruthful!  My nephew Algernon?  Impossible!  He is an
Oxonian
Lady Bracknell.  Ahem!  Mr. Worthing, after careful consideration I have
decided entirely to overlook my nephew's conduct to you
Lady Bracknell.  [To Cecily.]  Come here, sweet child.  [Cecily goes
over.]  How old are you, dear?

Cecily.  Well, I am really only eighteen, but I always admit to twenty
when I go to evening parties
Jack.  Pray excuse me, Lady Bracknell, for interrupting you again, but it
is only fair to tell you that according to the terms of her grandfather's
will Miss Cardew does not come legally of age till she is thirty-five
Cecily.  Algy, could you wait for me till I was thirty-five?

Algernon.  Of course I could, Cecily.  You know I couldI hate waiting even five minutes for anybody.  It always makes me rather
cross.  I am not punctual myself, I know, but I do like punctuality in
others, and waiting, even to be married, is quite out of the question
Lady Bracknell.  My dear Mr. Worthing, as Miss Cardew states positively
that she cannot wait till she is thirty-five--a remark which I am bound
to say seems to me to show a somewhat impatient nature--I would beg of
you to reconsider your decision
Lady Bracknell.  [Rising and drawing herself up.]  You must be quite
aware that what you propose is out of the question
Lady Bracknell.  That is not the destiny I propose for Gwendolen
[Enter Dr. Chasuble.]

Chasuble.  Everything is quite ready for the christenings
Lady Bracknell.  At their age?  The idea is grotesque and irreligious!
Algernon, I forbid you to be baptized.  I will not hear of such excesses
Chasuble.  Am I to understand then that there are to be no christenings
at all this afternoon?

Jack.  I don't think that, as things are now, it would be of much
practical value to either of us, Dr. ChasubleThey savour of the heretical views of the Anabaptists, views that I have
completely refuted in four of my unpublished sermons.  However, as your
present mood seems to be one peculiarly secular, I will return to the
church at once.  Indeed, I have just been informed by the pew-opener that
for the last hour and a half Miss Prism has been waiting for me in the
vestry
Lady Bracknell.  Pray allow me to detain you for a moment.  This matter
may prove to be one of vital importance to Lord Bracknell and myself.  Is
this Miss Prism a female of repellent aspect, remotely connected with
education?

Chasuble.  [Somewhat indignantly.]  She is the most cultivated of ladies,
and the very picture of respectability
Jack.  [Interposing.]  Miss Prism, Lady Bracknell, has been for the last
three years Miss Cardew's esteemed governess and valued companionLet her be sent for
[Enter Miss Prism hurriedly.]

Miss Prism.  I was told you expected me in the vestry, dear Canon.  I
have been waiting for you there for an hour and three-quarters.  [Catches
sight of Lady Bracknell, who has fixed her with a stony glare.  Miss
Prism grows pale and quails.  She looks anxiously round as if desirous to
escape.]

Lady Bracknell.  [In a severe, judicial voice.]  Prism!  [Miss Prism bows
her head in shame.]  Come here, Prism!  [Miss Prism approaches in a
humble manner.]  Prism!  Where is that baby?  [General consternation.  The
Canon starts back in horror.  Algernon and Jack pretend to be anxious to
shield Cecily and Gwendolen from hearing the details of a terrible public
scandal.]  Twenty-eight years ago, Prism, you left Lord Bracknell's
house, Number 104, Upper Grosvenor Street, in charge of a perambulator
that contained a baby of the male sex.  You never returned.  A few weeks
later, through the elaborate investigations of the Metropolitan police,
the perambulator was discovered at midnight, standing by itself in a
remote corner of Bayswater.  It contained the manuscript of a
three-volume novel of more than usually revolting sentimentality.  [Miss
Prism starts in involuntary indignation.]  But the baby was not there!
[Every one looks at Miss Prism.]  Prism!  Where is that baby?  [A pause.]

Miss Prism.  Lady Bracknell, I admit with shame that I do not know.  I
only wish I did.  The plain facts of the case are these.  On the morning
of the day you mention, a day that is for ever branded on my memory, I
prepared as usual to take the baby out in its perambulator.  I had also
with me a somewhat old, but capacious hand-bag in which I had intended to
place the manuscript of a work of fiction that I had written during my
few unoccupied hours.  In a moment of mental abstraction, for which I
never can forgive myself, I deposited the manuscript in the basinette,
and placed the baby in the hand-bag
Jack.  Miss Prism, this is a matter of no small importance to me.  I
insist on knowing where you deposited the hand-bag that contained that
infant
Jack.  What railway station?

Miss Prism.  [Quite crushed.]  Victoria.  The Brighton line.  [Sinks into
a chair.]

Jack.  I must retire to my room for a moment.  Gwendolen, wait here for
me
[Noises heard overhead as if some one was throwing trunks about.  Every
one looks up.]

Cecily.  Uncle Jack seems strangely agitated
Lady Bracknell.  This noise is extremely unpleasant.  It sounds as if he
was having an argument.  I dislike arguments of any kind.  They are
always vulgar, and often convincing
Gwendolen.  This suspense is terrible.  I hope it will last.  [Enter Jack
with a hand-bag of black leather in his hand.]

Jack.  [Rushing over to Miss Prism.]  Is this the hand-bag, Miss Prism?
Examine it carefully before you speak.  The happiness of more than one
life depends on your answer
Jack.  [In a pathetic voice.]  Miss Prism, more is restored to you than
this hand-bag.  I was the baby you placed in it[Pointing to Lady Bracknell.]  There is the lady who can tell you who you
really areMoncrieff, and consequently Algernon's elder brotherChasuble, my unfortunate brother.  Miss Prism, my unfortunate brother
Algernon.  Well, not till to-day, old boy, I admit.  I did my best,
however, though I was out of practice
Cecily.  What a noble nature you have, Gwendolen!

Jack.  Then the question had better be cleared up at once.  Aunt Augusta,
a moment.  At the time when Miss Prism left me in the hand-bag, had I
been christened already?

Lady Bracknell.  Every luxury that money could buy, including
christening, had been lavished on you by your fond and doting parents
Lady Bracknell.  Being the eldest son you were naturally christened after
your fatherHe was eccentric, I admit.  But only in later years.  And that was the
result of the Indian climate, and marriage, and indigestion, and other
things of that kind
Jack.  His name would appear in the Army Lists of the period, I suppose,
Aunt Augusta?

Lady Bracknell.  The General was essentially a man of peace, except in
his domestic life.  But I have no doubt his name would appear in any
military directory
Lady Bracknell.  Yes, I remember now that the General was called Ernest,
I knew I had some particular reason for disliking the name
Jack.  My own one!

Chasuble.  [To Miss Prism.]  Laetitia!  [Embraces her]

Miss Prism.  [Enthusiastically.]  Frederick!  At last!

Algernon.  Cecily!  [Embraces her.]  At last!

Jack.  Gwendolen!  [Embraces her.]  At last!

Lady Bracknell.  My nephew, you seem to be displaying signs of
triviality
TABLEAU



***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE IMPORTANCE OF BEING EARNEST***


******* This file should be named 844.txt or 844.zip *******


This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/8/4/844



Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed


*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://www.gutenberg.org/license)If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8
1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others
1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9
1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm
1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1
1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works
- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works
1.F
1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE
1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSEIf any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions

Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of lifeTo learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/pglaf
The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S
The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate
Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations
Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer supportunless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition